Astronomers have taken their first 3D look at a gigantic filament 
of dark matter, an invisible cosmic structure that can only be 
detected by its gravitational effects it has on its surroundings.

The universe is thought to be structured like a tangled web, 
with long strings of mostly dark matter intersecting at giant 
galaxy clusters. Since dark matter cannot be seen directly, 
these filaments are difficult to observe. But using the 
Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers have managed to probe 
one of the elusive cosmic strands in 3D.

The researchers sought out a 60 million light-year strand of 
dark matter around the massive galaxy cluster MACS J0717. 
The galaxy cluster is one of the largest yet seen and is 
about 5.4 billion light-years from Earth.

"From our earlier work on MACS J0717, we knew that this 
cluster is actively growing, and thus a prime target for 
a detailed study of the cosmic web," study researcher 
Harald Ebeling, of the University of Hawaii at Manoa, 
said in a statement Tuesday (Oct. 16).

This enormous image shows Hubble's view of massive galaxy 
cluster MACS J0717. The large field of view is a combination 
of 18 separate Hubble images. The location of the dark matter 
is revealed in a map of the mass in the cluster and surrounding 
region, shown here in blue. The filament visibly extends out 
and to the left of the cluster core.

Ebeling and his fellow researchers analyzed images 
of the cluster from the Hubble Space Telescope, 
as well as Japan's Subaru Telescope and the 
Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope. They also used 
gravitational lensing techniques to map extent 
of the massive dark matter filament.

Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity holds 
that massive objects, including dark matter, warp 
space and time around them, causing light passing 
through to travel along a crooked path. Filaments 
thus distort the images of galaxies in the background 
and the researchers were able to convert the image 
distortions into a mass map for the string of dark 
matter extending from MACS J0717.

Additional observations from ground-based telescopes, 
allowed the astronomers to map the filament's structure 
in 3D, a first for astronomers. (Researchers say the 
first identification of a section of a dark matter 
filament was made earlier this year between the two 
galaxy clusters Abell 222 and Abell 223.)

The team found that the filament stretches back from 
the core of MACS J0717, almost along our line of sight 
from Earth.

With a length of 60 million light-years, the filament's 
sheer size is extreme, researchers said. If it is 
representative of other strands, then these strings 
might contain even more dark matter than theorists 
had predicted.

The study will appear in the Nov. 1 issue of Monthly 
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society.

# TEXT FROM http://www.space.com/18083-elusive-dark-matter-3d-view.html